Authentication and Authorisation (#13)
iver-wharf/rfcs: _published/0012-authentication.md

---
layout: default

# This is just to fool remark-stringify not to escape & symbols

# See https://github.com/syntax-tree/mdast-util-to-markdown/issues/8

shields_io_query_params: label=issue%20state&logo=github&style=flat-square

# Update the following (it's YAML syntax)

pr_id: 12 # Update this with PR number/ID. No leading zeros rfc_feature_name:
authentication # Use kebab-case title: "RFC-0012: Authentication" # Update this
with PR number/ID and feature name. Use leading zeros rfc_author_username:
fredx30 rfc_author_name: Fredrik Dyrvold # Or same as username, if you wish

# Leave these. Collaborator changes this before merging

impl_issue_id: 0 impl_issue_repo: iver-wharf/wharf-api last_modified_date:

> 2021-06-16

Reviewer: Something seems to have happened to your frontmatter, and you're referencing PR 12 instead of PR 13

If your text editor made these changes then maybe it doesn't support frontmatters. If this is the case, then try look for some setting or plugin, or use a different editor when editing these RFCs

```suggestion
layout: default
# This is just to fool remark-stringify not to escape & symbols
# See https://github.com/syntax-tree/mdast-util-to-markdown/issues/8
shields_io_query_params: label=issue%20state&logo=github&style=flat-square

# Update the following (it's YAML syntax)
pr_id: 13 # Update this with PR number/ID. No leading zeros
rfc_feature_name: authentication # Use kebab-case
title: "RFC-0013: authentication" # Update this with PR number/ID and feature name. Use leading zeros
rfc_author_username: fredx30
rfc_author_name: Fredrik Dyrvold # Or same as username, if you wish

# Leave these. Collaborator changes this before merging
impl_issue_id: 0
impl_issue_repo: iver-wharf/wharf-api
last_modified_date: 2021-06-16
```

Author: Do you have any tips on formatting these front matters? Right now the fall under generic markdown formatting. I cant keep spacing but i should be able to keep line breaks correctly. The paragraphs get auto merged when they are not double spaced to comply with the line length rules.

Reviewer: Depends on how you're formatting them. If manually, then leaving them as-is should be enough. If using [remark-lint](https://github.com/remarkjs/remark-lint), either via their CLI or via some editor integration, then make sure you've run the `npm install` as the `remark-frontmatter` is one of our dependencies. If using [Prettier](https://github.com/prettier/prettier-vscode) then it should be able to handle frontmatters, so make sure you're using the latest version.

Where is the formatting coming from?

---

# {{page.title}}

- RFC
  PR: [iver-wharf/rfcs#{{page.pr_id}}](https://github.com/iver-wharf/rfcs/pulls/{{page.pr_id}})
- Feature name: `{{page.rfc_feature_name}}`
- Author:
  {{page.rfc_author_name}} ([@{{page.rfc_author_username}}](https://github.com/{{page.rfc_author_username}}))
- Implementation
  issue: [{{page.impl_issue_repo}}#{{page.impl_issue_id}}](https://github.com/{{page.impl_issue_repo}}/issues/{{page.impl_issue_id}})
- Implementation

>   status: ![GitHub issue state](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/detail/state/{{page.impl_issue_repo}}/{{page.impl_issue_id}}?{{page.shields_io_query_params}})

Reviewer: nit: Excess line wrapping

```suggestion
- RFC PR: [iver-wharf/rfcs#{{page.pr_id}}](https://github.com/iver-wharf/rfcs/pulls/{{page.pr_id}})
- Feature name: `{{page.rfc_feature_name}}`
- Author: {{page.rfc_author_name}} ([@{{page.rfc_author_username}}](https://github.com/{{page.rfc_author_username}}))
- Implementation issue: [{{page.impl_issue_repo}}#{{page.impl_issue_id}}](https://github.com/{{page.impl_issue_repo}}/issues/{{page.impl_issue_id}})
- Implementation status: ![GitHub issue state](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/detail/state/{{page.impl_issue_repo}}/{{page.impl_issue_id}}?{{page.shields_io_query_params}})
```

## Summary

Wharf should have authentication. Wharf currently has no authentication. This

> will outline a plan to implement [OpenID Connect (OICD)](https://openid.net/connect/)

Reviewer: Isn't the abbreviation for [O]pen[ID] [C]onnect? (https://infosec.mozilla.org/guidelines/iam/openid_connect.html#common-abbreviations--definitions)

```suggestion
will outline a plan to implement [OpenID Connect (OIDC)](https://openid.net/connect/)
```

> in wharf. This RFC will only outline authentication with OICD and not

Reviewer: nit:

```suggestion
in Wharf. This RFC will only outline authentication with OIDC and not
```

authorization and user/group
management. A further plan to implement user groups and authorization is
expected to be drawn up in a later document.

## Motivation

Some claim a good feature of secure infrastructure is access control. Currently,
our only solution is network isolation. Being able to restrict access to varying
degrees is a product goal to satisfy business needs.

## Explanation

Pre implementation stages

> 1. OICD in any form demands full SSL security in all connections. In order to

Reviewer: Isn't the abbreviation for [O]pen[ID] [C]onnect? (https://infosec.mozilla.org/guidelines/iam/openid_connect.html#common-abbreviations--definitions)

```suggestion
1. OIDC in any form demands full SSL security in all connections. In order to
```

   avoid having to fill the development environment with --force-unsecure
   bindings we should consider implementing certificate generation and importing
   for dev environments.

Implementations stages

1. Docker compose setup for Hydra Proxy setup
   - This involves integration with the currently existing DB.

> 2. Hydra (Authorisation server) - Connect to IDP (Config for Azure AD iver.se)

Reviewer: We want to refrain from making references to any of our services. It does help with understanding for us, but as we [Iver devs] are the only ones that use the Iver AD then I suggest against referencing it.

Also, an explanation of the IDP abbreviation on its first occurrence would be helpful

Also 2, we're using american spelling :)

```suggestion
2. Hydra (Authorization server) - Connect to IDP (IDentity Provider), such as Azure AD
```

   - Config instructions documented [here](https://www.ory.sh/hydra/docs/reference/configuration)
   - [OpenID-Configuration](https://login.microsoftonline.com/common/.well-known/openid-configuration)
   -
3. Wharf-web - configure and setup [angular-auth-oicd-client](https://github.com/damienbod/angular-auth-oidc-client)
   - Implement login endpoint
   - Implement consent endpoint
   - Implement logout endpoint

4. Wharf-api - Implement and test
   - [Go SDK for ory Hydra](https://www.ory.sh/hydra/docs/sdk/go)
   - Inspiration for [gin middleware here](https://github.com/janekolszak/gin-hydra/blob/master/ginhydra.go)

>      note this is outdated.

Reviewer: I'm having trouble understanding what ORY Hydra actually solves for us.

I think it would help with a graph (graphical/image or ASCII/Markdown art) that shows where ORY Hydra is meant to live.

1. Does the IDPs, such as Azure AD, talk to ORY Hydra or talk to our API then then talks to ORY Hydra?
2. Does ORY Hydra need any persistence? Do we give it direct access to our DB, or do our API act as a DB proxy, or does it have its own storage?
3. When someone wants to use our API as a service, do they also need the ORY Hydra SDK?

Author: Ory Hydra is an implementation of the OpenID Connect standard. The standards documents themselves reccomend using an approved solution to implement the standard. Ory Hydra is one such approved solution.

See below for a map-
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/4283527/126124274-dad765b8-901a-4da6-a9a7-132750f3e4bf.png)
In this case the providers are just interfaces to the wharf-api and not exposed microservices for simplicity.

1. The wharf's environment link out to IdPs is the ory-hydra pod it acts as a gateway for all things identity.
2. Yes, for the tests i have done thus far i have been using postgres as persistent storage, but other options are available.
3. No but they will need to conform to OpenId Connect.

Reviewer: Very nice graphic, and fine answers! Would like to have this explained in the RFC in a nice way as well, so it answers my questions there. (I've not checked yet if you've already added them)

7. Edit wharf-web services to use bearer tokens through angular middleware
   configured through `agular-auth-oicd-client`

8. Wharf-provider-* - Implement and test

>    - Likely identical to procedure for wharf-api.

Reviewer: The providers today only forwards the "Authorization" header. If it receives a "401 Unauthorized" from the wharf-api then it returns the same response from the provider itself.

I think it would be wise to keep the providers dumb in this way. They do not manage any authentication/authorization at all.

Author: As they are separate clients that connect to the untrusted zone which is the wharf-web-client then as far as my understanding goes they would have to individually establish trust with the authorization server.

Alternativly if we start and finish the project to move the provider clients (wharf-provider-github, wharf-provider-azuredevops, wharf-provider-gitlab) into the wharf-api such that they are not exposed microservices then the model could be simplified. 

1) Either they could be microservices that are unauthenticated but ARE restricted to ONLY the trusted network. In this case they could be kept outside the authentication system and just remain unprotected.

2) They could be turned into interfaces which get implemented by the wharf-api endpoint. This way they wouldnt be networked and therefore authentication would not be applicable.

Reviewer: While I do like the 2nd alternative more, Go does not have good plugin support. So option 1 is the best for allowing users to add more provider plugins without recompiling the main API. Letting them live as microservices also makes it easier to host them in k8s and docker-compose as then it will be as simple as adding yet another pod/container to the mix and then you're done (in theory).

I'll start working on an RFC for the reworked providers integration.

### Flows

OpenID Connect - Flows
A good guide on flows is available [here on auth0](https://auth0.com/docs/flows).

> Or for a more fun version checkout [this game by auth0](https://iverab-my.sharepoint.com/:i:/g/personal/fredrik_dyrvold_iver_se/Ef41bR71qeNOk-QWhCar0V4BZN8WqvM7iEf5g7ml9_s7Ew?e=ZoZRN6)

Reviewer: Suggest embedding the image inside the repository instead of linking it to your sharepoint.

In #14, @Alexamakans have used a root folder named `assets`. Suggest doing the same.

### Identity provider

We should connect to azure ad on our local deployments.

> We should not hav our own identity provider setup with wharf for now.

Reviewer: I think this is a bad idea. I'm a hard advocate for forcing the local dev environment to only rely on local resources.

We should look at some basic IDP that we can host alongside the docker-compose setup, so when you have the images downloaded then Wharf will not require any internet connection.

To me it feels silly to require all devs to setup something like a GitHub app just to log into the local dev Wharf instance, and it will get tedious or in our way fast.

I think that having one from the get-go should be a priority

Author: > I think this is a bad idea. I'm a hard advocate for forcing the local dev environment to only rely on local resources.

The concept of running locally without external connectivity seems highly valuable. 

> We should look at some basic IDP that we can host alongside the docker-compose setup, so when you have the images downloaded then Wharf will not require any internet connection.

In the ory environment this would require the setup of a local idp. This local idp (when sourced from ory) is called [Ory-Kratos](https://www.ory.sh/kratos). If we do this then i think we should put off the requirement of using the AzureAD till a later RFC ex. after authorisation is in place.

If we were to create/switch on a bypass for the authentication system based on a developement flag we may be able to get a prototype off the ground faster with a smaller change footprint. This could allow for continuing work on prototyping integration with AzureAD while still retaining non-internet-connected development. 

The azureAD still seems like a requirement for this feature as that is where Iver is at.

> To me it feels silly to require all devs to setup something like a GitHub app just to log into the local dev Wharf instance, and it will get tedious or in our way fast.

If we use azure or github as an identity provider then there is no need to setup anything more. The remote endpoints are login.microsoft.com or github.com depending on the github/azureAD choice.

> I think that having one from the get-go should be a priority

I agree we should be able to develop and use the dev environments locally without connectivity to the internet. I disagree with the assumption that we should have a local idp. Some disadvantages of having a local idp include
##### Sprawl of user administration
In a production environment with a separate idp of our own we would get extra work in the form of having to conform to usder off&on boarding procedures. Using our remote idp this would not be an issue as we would be piggypbacking off exsisting such infrastructure, past and present.
#####  GDPR Storage of additional user specific info
We will likely need to store the name of a user even if we only use the authorisation server. 
If we start hosting an IDP of our own we will also need to store email or other contact information in order to deal with account recovery options.
##### Complexity
If we need a local idp setup for wharf then that should be a project of its own that would need to get completed before the authentication project can be started. While getting a prototype user store up and running with ory kratos may be relativly simple- scaling that to production does not seem trivial. 
IMO Adding a requirement of a yet non-exsisting, non-planned idp would act as a full hard block/stop for this project.

Reviewer: Seems like I don't know the full implications of the term IDP.

I meant that for local development only we have some local username+password store that perhaps the ORY Hydra talks to. Then for production we only rely on third-party IDP such as Azure AD.

By having a local dev-only solution then we could really cut some corners and use more or less anything that's OpenID compliant. Could be a simple page with a single hardcoded username+password, or even just a button that says "Yep, log me in to local dev Wharf" without even having to provide any credentials. Doesn't even have to be a "certified" solution, as long as it complies with the spec so that we can manually e2e test it.

My intention is not to include some self-hosted IDP when we deploy Wharf to k8s, as that bring up so many of the problems that you talked about. Better to have this auth opt-in until we get that Azure AD integration set up.

We should also be able to publish code in such a way that the IDP is
interchangeable. If it is used by the public they can set up their own IDP

> and connect to that.

Reviewer: What is the "it" that you're referring to?

Also, just throwing it out there, we may want to design this so we could support multiple IDP's for a single instance?

Author: > What is the "it" that you're referring to?'

Wharf

```suggestion
We should also be able to publish code in such a way that the IDP is
interchangeable. If Iver-Wharf is used by the public they can set up their own IDP
and connect to that.
```

> Also, just throwing it out there, we may want to design this so we could support multiple IDP's for a single instance?

My understanding is that this is supported. Each separate endpoint should be one configuration file, as well as a link (auth icon) from the login interface. See sample from quay.io's login screen here 
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/4283527/125623460-8afe9324-8a78-47e2-b8a3-57eb07323cbd.png)

Reviewer: Awesome :call_me_hand:

### Authorisation server

There are many [alternatives](https://openid.net/developers/certified/) on
alternative authorisation servers.

We had a quick info share from spark the spark project. They are using open
identity server 3 or 4. This however appears to be relatively tightly coupled

> with the .NET framework.

Reviewer: Don't refer to internal services.

```suggestion
We had a quick info share from coworkers of a different project. They are using open
identity server 3 or 4. This however appears to be relatively tightly coupled
with the .NET framework.
```

One that seems to align well with this

> project is `Ory - Hydra` [github](https://github.com/ory/hydra)
> and [docs](https://www.ory.sh/hydra/docs/). The descriptions of them from their
> github at the present time is:
> 
> ```
> ORY Hydra is a hardened, OpenID Certified OAuth 2.0 Server and OpenID Connect
> Provider optimized for low-latency, high throughput, and low resource
> consumption. ORY Hydra is not an identity provider (user sign up, user
> login, password reset flow), but connects to your existing identity provider
> through a login and consent app. Implementing the login and consent app in a
> different language is easy, and exemplary consent apps (Node) and SDKs for all
> common languages are provided.
> ```

Reviewer: nit: Suggest using blockquote instead of codeblock.

I personally like to add the source link at the end of the citation instead of before it, as I find it easier to see where it's taken from.

```suggestion
project is "Ory - Hydra" ([docs](https://www.ory.sh/hydra/docs/)).
The descriptions of them from their GitHub at the present time is:

> ORY Hydra is a hardened, OpenID Certified OAuth 2.0 Server and OpenID Connect
> Provider optimized for low-latency, high throughput, and low resource
> consumption. ORY Hydra is not an identity provider (user sign up, user
> login, password reset flow), but connects to your existing identity provider
> through a login and consent app. Implementing the login and consent app in a
> different language is easy, and exemplary consent apps (Node) and SDKs for
> all common languages are provided.
>
> <https://github.com/ory/hydra>
```

> They appear to be funded through opencollective and patreon.

Reviewer: This seems irrelevant. The source of funds should not be factored into our decision on which tool to use.

Also, companies usually tries to sell their products and support besides accepting donations/sponsoring.

```suggestion
```

Author: The source of funds should absolutely be considered. In a worst case scenario you might end up working with an supporting cirme, terrorism, or other illegal activities. A more likely scenario is perhaps the introduction of a dependency developed by a mallicious third party.
Picking dependencies that remain supported and popular can save alot of future development work that comes with migrating dependencies.

Reviewer: Ah great POV. Like if they're crowdfunded, then there's at least a community that confirms that it's not bad? I buy that

Another alternative to consider could be [Keycloak](https://www.keycloak.org/).
This appears to contain
much more finished work such as a user admin panel for
setting user and group rights. It is styled using themes. Con: Its a redhat
project which means association with IBM which has had a certain downside in

> relation to opensource projects in the past see

Reviewer: This paragraph seems to be unfinished.

And RedHat, hate them or love them, has still made a lot of great contributions to the free and open source ecosystem. Their association with IBM in my opinion is not of concern today. We can start moving away from their tools, such as Quay, once they really start going against free and open source morals.

Without a source, this comment of yours seems to be based on rumors, and I suggest removing it.

Author: The source i meant to find for this is [this post](https://blog.centos.org/2020/12/future-is-centos-stream/) from centos right after RedHat was aquired by IBM. In this case support was cut for a new image from May 31, 2029 to December 31, 2021.

Author: Although this should probably not mention the company specifically by name. I will instead replace this with the uncited motivation `Picking dependencies that remain supported and popular can save alot of future development work that comes with migrating dependencies.` and reformulate the surounding paragraph.

## Compatibility

Expect no compatability between versions of wharf without authentication to
versions of wharf with authentication. There is a potential threat in leaving
the system backwards compatible in that a non-secured version of the api could

> run together in an otherwise secure cluster.

Reviewer: I think having the authentication opt-in to begin with would be a good step, and then in the next major version jump we make it mandatory. Just so we can test the system with authentication so all parts play well first, before making the jump to mandatory auth.

There's a lot of microservices that needs to be authenticated, and in different ways. Seems very foot-shooting prone if we naively enforce OIDC

Author: This is rewritten in the new version but may require an extra consideration again as the circumstances have changed.

We should aim to pick a solution where any identity provider (IDP) can be used.
Locking ourselves to a single IDP when a standard such as OICD exists seems
unnecessary. Keeping the choice of IDP open will leave more room for
choice in the future.

## Alternative solutions

The starting assumption for this RFC is usage of the [OpenID Connect spec](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html).
There is a [list of certified providers](https://openid.net/developers/certified/).

## Future possibilities

After this we should consider
- User management interfaces
- User group management interfaces
- Authorization
- Permissions

> ## Unresolved questions

Reviewer: I know we'll get the question further on about LDAP or just using a in-database account store. How does this solution handle this?

Some of the best services, from the user and admin perspective, that we use are for example Grafana and GitLab that allows us to set up LDAP authentication as well as creating custom local users.

How does this proposed ORY Hydra solution handle this? For example mixing multiple login providers, such as username+password (for the initial admin account), an OIDC login (such as Azure AD or via GitHub Apps), and a LDAP login, all side by side (if the operations team so wanted it). Maybe even login from multiple LDAP or OIDC connections?

I sense that this is difficult to change later on if we end up only supporting OIDC and nothing else.

Author: I think its possible to read microsoft style AD FS ldap attributes through OIDC scopes. There is an [article here](https://cloud.google.com/anthos/clusters/docs/on-prem/1.7/how-to/oidc-adfs#mapping_ldap_attributes_to_claim_names) that outlines a plan for how its done. Testing this for our use case which seems quite different requires setting up infrastructure that has costs (in both time an money) associated to it. I do not intend to test this in practice as of now.
If we use OIDC to connect an AD FS IdP to our hydra server then we are likely using LDAP i assume the same goes for azureAD. If we connect hydra to kratos (both are ory products) then we would not be using LDAP. Kratos uses postgres by default but has some other options.
If you happen to mean SAML instead of LDAP then the answer is no we would not support SAML as far as this RFC goes. The implementation is different. Use of OIDC is a starting assumption for this RFC. This is stated in the summary.

Multiple different OIDC endpoints are possible.

> I sense that this is difficult to change later on if we end up only supporting OIDC and nothing else.

Yes. I belive adding support for other authentication styles would be difficult counter productive if we achive compatability with OIDC. Use of OIDC is a starting assumption for this RFC. This is stated in the summary.

Reviewer: Good answer!

So for the sake of this RFC, we could ignore LDAP. But supporting username+password locally, which as I understand it is possible with ORY Hydra, is more essential even if this is the initial proposal

Author: This particular scenario has changed quite a bit since the rewrite. In the new model i propse we include a flipswitch to disable token validation in the backend for developer environments. This could allow navigation as normal entierly without logging in.

1. Swagger - how will this integrate with OpenID Connect auth?
   some info is available at [swagger docs](https://swagger.io/docs/specification/authentication/openid-connect-discovery/)
2. Production like deployments - We need to setup helm charts?, IDP

>    configuration for hydra?, and maybe more. [Some info available in docs](https://www.ory.sh/hydra/docs/production)

Reviewer: For Postgres we've decided that users deploy this themselves. Maybe we could do the same with hydra, depending on how many ways there are of hosting it. If it's "just" a basic pod, no PVC and no special requirements, then we could probably just embed it into our wharf-helm Helm chart

3. In oder to keep the docker containers able to start stateless/self-contained
   we need to find a way to ensure that registering client with the
   authorization server either becomes part of a run-once startup script for a

>    new deployment or gets properly built into the build process. [See docs](https://www.ory.sh/hydra/docs/guides/oauth2-public-spa-mobile)

Reviewer: I may misunderstand the question here, but this should arguably just be a config that you as an admin configure when deploying Wharf.

This is such a critical setting that I don't think it would be wise to configure dynamically inside the database, but instead we do it via config.yaml and environment variables

4. We need some way of introducing a first admin account. This will be needed

>    on database clean starts. Perhaps an SQL inject?

Reviewer: Observing how other services solve this, there's two main alternatives:

1. Receive some kind of error from the API telling us it does not have the initial admin account set up. Then the web frontend, or any other client accessing the API, can create an admin account. This gives better UX where the installation process is just `helm install` and then configure via the web interface.

2. We have a config in the deployment of something like `initialAdminUsername` and `initialAdminPassword` that is created when the API boots up and there are 0 users. This is a little worse UX as most work is done during the configuring before releasing for the first time, but better UX for IasC operations.

As we have most our configs declared beforehand, I find option 2 to be best, and also probably easier to implement anyway.
